JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
JEFF SESSIONS, U.S. Attorney
General: The suggestion that I
participated in any collusion
that I was aware of,
any collusion with the
Russian government to
hurt this country, which
I have served with honor for
35 years, is an appalling
and detestable lie.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jeff
Sessions in the hot seat.
The attorney general testifies
before the Senate over
allegations of collusion with
Russia and defends his decision
to recommend the firing of
then FBI Director James Comey.
Then: North Korea releases
University of Virginia
student Otto Warmbier,
who is in a coma, more
than a year after
he was sentenced to
15 years hard labor.
And Uber's CEO takes a leave
of absence amid a review of the
company's policies and culture,
which have been under
fire since a recent
string of controversies.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It has been
another day of high-stakes
testimony before the
Senate Intelligence
Committee.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions
today denied any wrongdoing
in his contacts with Russian
officials during last year's
campaign or in his conduct
since becoming attorney general.
He acknowledged that then
FBI Director James Comey was
concerned about being left alone
with President Trump
after a February meeting.
He declined to discuss any
conversations he had with the
president on firing Comey.
And he defended his
handling of his recusal
from the investigation
into Russian meddling
in the election.
Sessions also said he still
doesn't remember a meeting with
the Russian ambassador at a
Trump speech in
Washington last year.
And he said he never meant
to mislead anyone during
his confirmation hearings.
JEFF SESSIONS, U.S. Attorney
General: Let me state
this clearly, colleagues.
I have never met with
or had any conversation
with any Russians or
any foreign officials
concerning any type of
interference with any
campaign or election
in the United States.
Further, I have no knowledge of
any such conversations by anyone
connected to the Trump campaign.
I was your colleague in
this body for 20 years,
at least some of you.
And the suggestion that
I participated in any
collusion, that I was
aware of any collusion
with the Russian government to
hurt this country, which I have
served with honor for 35 years,
or to undermine the integrity
of our democratic process, is
an appalling and detestable lie.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The attorney
general also struck sparks today
when he declined several times
to discuss conversations
he had with President
Trump about firing James
Comey or about recusing
himself in the Russia matter.
Democrats, including Senator
Martin Heinrich of New Mexico,
were visibly frustrated.
JEFF SESSIONS: I'm not able
to share with this committee
private communications
SEN.
MARTIN HEINRICH (D), New
Mexico: Because you're
invoking executive privilege?
JEFF SESSIONS: I'm not able
to invoke executive privilege.
That's the president's
prerogative.
SEN.
MARTIN HEINRICH: Well, my
understanding is, you took an
oath, you raised your right hand
here today and you said that
you would solemnly swear to tell
the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth.
And now you're not
answering questions.
You're impeding
this investigation.
JEFF SESSIONS: I am protecting
the president' constitutional
right by not giving it away
before he has a chance to...
(CROSSTALK)
SEN.
MARTIN HEINRICH: You're
having it both ways.
JEFF SESSIONS: And,
secondly, I am telling
the truth in answering
your question, in saying
it's a longstanding policy of
the Department of justice...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFF SESSIONS: ... even and
to make sure the president has
full opportunity to decide these
issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, in
another, separate hearing
today, the deputy attorney
general, Rod Rosenstein,
pledged to defend special
counsel Bob Mueller's
probe of Russian
meddling in the election.
Conservative media executive
and Trump ally Christopher
Ruddy told the "NewsHour" last
night that the president has
been considering firing Mueller.
But in exchanges with Republican
Senators Susan Collins and
Lindsey Graham, Rosenstein
said that he wants to put
that speculation to rest.
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS (R), Maine: If
President Trump ordered you to
fire the special counsel, what
would you do?
ROD ROSENSTEIN, Deputy Attorney
General Nominee: Senator, I'm
not going to follow any orders
unless I believe those are
lawful and appropriate orders.
If there were good cause,
I would consider it.
If there were not good
cause, it wouldn't matter
to me what anybody says.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: Do you know any reason
for a cause to fire Mr. Mueller
as of this date?
ROD ROSENSTEIN: No,
I do not, Senator.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM: And that
would be your decision if
that ever happened, right?
ROD ROSENSTEIN: That's correct.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we are
joined now by our Capitol Hill
correspondent, Lisa Desjardins.
She was in the room for both
of today's Senate hearings.
And Carrie Johnson,
correspondent for NPR, she
covers the Justice Department.
Thank you both.
Lisa, I'm going
to start with you.
You were in the room.
Tell us what you were seeing
and what you were hearing that
we couldn't see on television.
LISA DESJARDINS: Well,
this extraordinary
week just continued.
It was a rather remarkable
hearing, and not just because
there was yet again a line going
out the door and down
the hallway to attend
it, but I think because
we saw very serious
questions, Judy, from both
Republicans and Democrats
about Attorney General Sessions
and about the role of the
Trump administration and Trump
campaign in their meetings with
Russia.
I took away that this was
a serious investigation,
that senators are trying
to show the American
people, in particular with
this very public hearing, that
they're tackling this, but there
are still a lot of
questions left after today's
hearing as well, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Carrie
Johnson, as I said, you
cover the Justice Department.
You have been watching
this from that perspective.
What did you hear new
today in the testimony
by the attorney general?
CARRIE JOHNSON, NPR: For Jeff
Sessions, the attorney general,
a qualified or limited success
today.
He was able to defend himself
with respect to some of the
allegations swirling around
about him.
He denied he had a meeting with
the Russian ambassador last
year at the Mayflower Hotel.
He denied he had tried to lean
on the FBI director, fired
FBI Director James Comey,
and he also denied that
he had misled Congress
when he testified in his
confirmation hearings
earlier this year that
he only had a couple
meetings with the Russians.
And he tried to clear up all
of those mistakes that he had
made, I think with some success
today, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Carrie, I was
struck that he - - sorry you're
having microphone troubles.
All right, let me go back to
Lisa Desjardins just a minute
while Carrie gets the earpiece
straightened out.
So, Lisa, I know you have
been talking to these senators
on the committee in the days
and weeks leading up to this.
For them, how critical
was this testimony by
the attorney general?
Is this just one more
step along a long road
of this investigation?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think
the answer that it was both
critical and it is just one more
step along the road
of this investigation.
Judy, I think we're at the
point where each one of these
kinds of hearings is critical.
And, to be honest, many of
these senators say they're
not exactly sure where all of
this is leading yet.
They're still asking these
first rounds of questions to
see who else do they need to
talk to and about which event.
And I think, Judy, the questions
remaining from today's hearing
especially are, did President
Trump directly order Mr.
Sessions to write that memo
endorsing James Comey's firing,
and what conversations
did they have about that?
Did President Trump indicate
why he wanted Mr. Comey fired?
As you played in the bite, Mr.
Sessions refused to answer any
communication questions about
his talks with Mr. Trump, and
that's something I think we're
going to see played a lot.
He was never able to give
a legal justification
for refusing to answer.
Instead, he I basically leaving
an opening for the president
to later invoke executive
privilege, but, Judy,
he hasn't done so yet.
And his attorney general hasn't
answered these questions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
Carrie, back to you now.
Again, you have been
following this very closely.
What questions do you still
have that the attorney general
either wasn't able to or
didn't answer today?
CARRIE JOHNSON: The attorney
general never said whether
the president discussed with
him in connection with firing
James Comey anything regarding
the Russia investigation.
The attorney general refused
to answer whether the president
had brought up with him the
idea of pardoning anyone in
the Trump campaign who may have
had contacts with the Russians
last year.
And the attorney general really
didn't have a good answer
for why he left James Comey
hanging to defend himself after
the president pressured him in
the Oval Office on the Russia
probe, so lots of questions
remaining for Jeff Sessions
on those topics as it relates
to his interactions
with President Trump.
And I think some of the
Democrats on the committee
today vowed to get answers
to those questions,
come hell or high water.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Carrie, just a
quick question of clarification.
You said he didn't address
pardoning anyone in connection
with the Russia investigation.
What are you referring to?
CARRIE JOHNSON: Well, he was
asked questions by Democrats
today, Jeff Sessions was, about
whether -- you know, this
investigation is early, but
whether he had talked with the
president at all about the
president using his power, very
vast power, to grant a pardon
to anyone who may have engaged
in wrongdoing in connection
with Russia in the campaign.
No names were mentioned.
We know that several
people, including
President Trump's former
national security adviser,
Michael Flynn, are
under investigators'
crosshairs right now.
We know that Flynn, in fact,
has tried to seek immunity,
so far without success.
Sessions was asked whether the
idea of pardoning anybody came
up, and he declined to answer
that question as part of the
confidential conversations he
was having with the president.
I want to know more about that.
I think lawmakers do, too.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Carrie Johnson,
as we said, who covers the
Justice Department for NPR,
our own Lisa Desjardins at
the Capitol, thank you both.
And we turn now to our
panel of former Justice
Department officials.
George Terwilliger served as
former deputy attorney general
and acting attorney general
under President
George H.W. Bush.
Walter Dellinger served in
the Clinton administration
as assistant attorney
general and as acting
solicitor general.
And Carrie Cordero, she served
in the Justice Department
under presidents George W. Bush
and President Obama, where
she worked on matters
of national security.
Now, before I speak with them,
one issue today was former
FBI Director Comey's testimony
about a February meeting in
the Oval Office, when everyone
else left, and the president
asked him to stay.
Democratic Senator Mark
Warner today pressed the
attorney general on that.
Let's listen.
®MD-BSEN.
MARK WARNER (D), Virginia: Mr.
Comey's testimony last week was
that he felt uncomfortable when
the president asked everyone
else to leave the room.
He left the impression that
you lingered, perhaps a sense
that you felt uncomfortable
about it as well.
JEFF SESSIONS: Well, I
would just say it this way.
We were there.
I was standing there.
And without revealing any
conversation that took place,
what I do recall is that I did
depart.
I believe everyone else
did depart, and Director
Comey was sitting in
front of the president's
desk, and they were talking.
So, that's what I do remember.
I believe it was the
next day that he said
something, expressed
concern about being left
alone with the president.
But that, in itself,
is not problematic.
He didn't tell me, at that time,
any details about anything that
was said that was improper.
I affirmed his concern that we
should be following the proper
guidelines of the Department of
Justice and basically backed
him up in his concerns.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, let's turn
now to our three panelists.
Carrie Cordero, I'm
going to start with you.
What do you make of that answer
that he really didn't have an
explanation for leaving the
room, whether he thought that
was unusual, leaving the Oval
Office when the president
wanted to be alone with the
then FBI director, and he didn't
seem terribly upset about the
fact that the FBI director
was concerned the next day
when he told him about it?
CARRIE CORDERO, Former
Department of Justice
Official: Right.
So, these memos that he's
talking about, this longstanding
Department of Justice policy,
has to do with, in recent
history, there was a
memo that an Attorney
General Mukasey issued,
that Eric Holder issued that
restrict the contacts between
the White House and the Justice
Department and the
FBI investigators on
ongoing investigations.
And so it was still an
odd answer, because, given
the fact that there was
this major investigation
going on that the attorney
general himself knew that he
was recused from, it would be
unusual.
Why would the president need
to hold back the FBI director
about something that the
attorney general couldn't
be present for, other than
the Russia investigation?
In other words, anything else
that the FBI director and the
president needed to discuss
of a substantive nature,
one would think the attorney
general could be there for it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: George
Terwilliger, what about that?
GEORGE TERWILLIGER, Former U.S.
Deputy Attorney General: Well,
I don't think it's that unusual
for a president to talk
to an FBI director alone.
I think it would probably be
worth asking a number of former
FBI directors if they ever
had one-on-one conversations
with the president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even in this
-- in the middle of this
kind of an investigation?
GEORGE TERWILLIGER: Yes.
I mean, I think, in hindsight,
anybody that looks at it would
go, it would have been better
for that not to have occurred,
but the fact that the president
asked and the attorney
general -- I just -- I
mean, he's a courteous man.
I think he respected
the president's wishes.
And more than anything, Judy,
I -- what came through to me
today, more than an attorney
general, was I saw a man who
said, you're not going to
play political football with
my integrity, and said
that very, very firmly
even as to that question.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Walter Dellinger,
what did you take away from
the hearing overall, and
what about the specific
point about the president
asking everybody to
clear the room while he
talked to James Comey?
®MD-BWALTER DELLINGER, Former
Acting Solicitor General: Well,
I think what was particularly
improper about that conversation
was the content of it, that is,
the president saying, I hope
you will end this investigation
into General Flynn.
Even if that wasn't a directive,
that statement that you should
end it because he's a good
guy undercuts our basic notion
of equal justice under law.
We shouldn't be investigating
or stopping investigations
because the president thinks
someone is a good guy or
a U.S. attorney thinks
someone is a good guy.
That's number one.
My larger takeaway
is that the attorney
general seemed relatively
passionate in defending
his own lack of involvement
with the Russians
and quite convincing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He did.
WALTER DELLINGER: He
showed much less concern
about this extraordinary
event that the Russian,
a foreign military
hostile power, tried to
interfere in our elections.
He referred to it as
improper, but he didn't seem
to have any energy about
where that investigation
should go, didn't seem to
suggest that the president of
the United States is concerned
about what was really a foreign
attack by a hostile power on
the core of our democracy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we have got
a little excerpt of that coming
up, and I want to ask you that.
But just quickly, on this point,
Carrie Cordero, again, on --
is there a precedent for the
attorney general basically
saying, it's OK for me to remove
myself from a conversation
and let the president talk
to the head of the FBI
about something sensitive?
CARRIE CORDERO: Well, so,
in other circumstances,
if, for example, the
FBI director was at the
White House to give a
counterterrorism briefing,
on some really substantive
matter, then, sure.
But there would be other
aides in the room, too.
That type of briefing wouldn't
take place just with the
president and the FBI director.
But those are the types
of scenarios that would
be more routine types
of meetings between
a president and an FBI
director, if it was some
substantive type of briefing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and -- and
keep all that in mind, because
we want to turn to another
aspect of what came out
in today's testimony.
And that is that more
than one senator asked
the attorney general
about the firing of James
Comey.
The attorney general
testified that he didn't
talk to the FBI director
about his job performance
before the president
dismissed him.
He did detail for California
Democrat Dianne Feinstein the
issues that he had with Comey,
but he declined to answer
a later question from Maine
independent Senator Angus King.
JEFF SESSIONS: We
had problems there.
And it was my best judgment that
a fresh start at the FBI was
the appropriate thing to do.
And when asked, I said
that to president.
It's something I had adhered to.
Deputy Rosenstein's letter
dealt with a number of things.
When the -- Mr. Comey declined
the Clinton prosecution,
that was really a usurpation
of the authority of the
federal prosecutors in
the Department of Justice.
It was a stunning development.
The FBI -- the investigative
team, they don't decide
prosecution policies.
And that was a thunderous thing.
He also commented at some
length on the declination
of the Clinton prosecution,
which you shouldn't
normally -- you shouldn't do.
The policies have been historic.
If you decline, you decline
and you don't talk about it.
There were other things that
had happened that indicated
to me a lack of discipline.
And it caused controversy
on both sides of the aisle.
And I had come to the
conclusion that a fresh
start was appropriate.
(CROSSTALK)
SEN.
ANGUS KING (I), Maine: In
any of your discussions
about the firing of James
Comey, did the question
of the Russian
investigation ever come up?
JEFF SESSIONS: I cannot
answer that because
it was a communication
by the president, or,
if any such occurred, it
would be a communication
that he has not waived.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, a number
of people, George Terwilliger,
were struck by the fact that
the attorney general wouldn't
talk about these conversations
he had with the president.
GEORGE TERWILLIGER: Well, to
me, that makes perfect sense.
The privilege belongs to the
president, and it wouldn't be
up to a subordinate official
to take it upon himself to
waive it by answering the
question at that time and place.
Otherwise, the president
loses the ability to assert
or preserve that privilege.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you
and I were discussing this
earlier, Walter Dellinger.
We were trying to understand,
to what extent is there a
precedent for not answering some
of these questions?
We heard the attorney general
say -- at one point, he said,
I think there's even a piece
of paper at the Justice
Department that refers
to privileged or
confidential conversations
between the president
and the attorney general.
WALTER DELLINGER: You know,
he was very well-prepared,
but he didn't bring
any such piece of paper
with him.
And I would be surprised,
because I don't believe there
is any privilege of refusing
to answer questions from
a congressional committee,
unless the president is
going to invoke executive
privilege.
And he didn't want to say that.
Through a dozen iterations of
the question, he would simply
say, it was confidential,
without asserting any privilege.
Finally, he suggested -- and the
committee should follow up on
this -- here are the questions
we want answered.
Did you discuss the Russian
investigation in connection
with the firing of Comey?
And if the president then wants
to assert executive privilege,
he can do so in writing
communicated to the committee.
But, if not, then the
question ought to be answered
by the attorney general.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Carrie
Cordero, this really does get to
the heart of a lot of what we're
talking about today, and that
is, the president has not so
far exerted executive privilege.
He has not said to the
attorney general, you cannot
answer these questions.
But the attorney general said,
at least on two occasions today,
that he's trying to protect
the president's right to
later on exert executive
privilege, which is a
way of looking at this,
I think, some of
us haven't seen.
CARRIE CORDERO: Right.
So, this is the second week in
a row that senior administration
officials have had difficulty
answering this question.
DNI Coats, Director of National
Intelligence Coats, and
Director of NSA Rogers last week
had a similar problem,
where they didn't seem
to have been advised by
the White House Counsel's
Office that they should
exert executive privilege,
and yet they were
uncomfortable giving answers
to questions.
Attorney General
Sessions handled it a
little bit differently.
He did say that he was trying
to protect a potential exertion
of executive privilege,
but he also raised
other privileges.
He said maybe there are
some other privileges.
And so that reminded
me a little bit more of
the attorney-client-type
privilege that
sometimes the Department of
Justice asserts, but that's
when the Justice Department is
giving legal advice to the
president, and they don't then
want to provide information
to Congress.
So, he was still vague and
unclear about which privileges
he was potentially asserting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that sounded
like a different question.
So, I'm coming back to
you, George Terwilliger,
to ask, on just how
solid is this ground that
the attorney general stands on
when he says, I'm protecting
the president's right to exert
executive...
GEORGE TERWILLIGER: I
think it's very solid.
And both Democrat and Republican
officials have asserted that
privilege over the years,
as recently as in the Obama
administration through
Attorney General Holder.
It's really quite
simple, I think, Judy.
If the president has a privilege
to have confidential discussions
with his advisers, which include
Cabinet officials, the
Cabinet officials shouldn't
be the ones to decide the
waive the confidentiality
of those communications.
And he doesn't know what
questions he is going
to be asked before he
gets up there, to ask
permission ahead of time,
can I talk about this,
can I talk about that?
So, I think it's just
a very practical issue.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, there is
another important part of this,
what came out today in today's
testimony that we
want to look at.
And that is on the attorney --
on the issue of the attorney
general's recusing himself
from the Russia investigation.
Mr. Sessions clashed at
one point with Oregon
Democratic Senator Ron
Wyden, who challenged
him on whether he
adhered to that recusal.
SEN.
RON WYDEN (D), Oregon: The
question is, Mr. Comey said that
there were matters with respect
to recusal that were problematic
and he couldn't talk about them.
What are they?
JEFF SESSIONS: Why
don't you tell me?
There are none, Senator Wyden.
There are none.
I can tell you that
for absolute certainty.
This is a secret innuendo
being leaked out there about
me, and I don't appreciate it.
And I have tried to give my
best and truthful answers to any
committee I've appeared before.
And it's really -- people are
suggesting through innuendo that
I have been not honest about
matters, and I've
tried to be honest.
SEN.
RON WYDEN: Why did you
sign a letter recommending
the fire -- firing of
Comey, when it violated
your recusal?
JEFF SESSIONS: It didn't
violate my recusal.
It didn't violate my recusal.
That would be answer to that.
And the letter that I signed
represented my views that had
been formulated for some time.
SEN.
RON WYDEN: Mr. Chairman, just
if I can finish, that answer,
in my view, doesn't pass the
smell test.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Walter
Dellinger, this is getting at
the -- what you heard, the tug
and pull about all afternoon,
and that is that letter that
the attorney general signed
and the deputy attorney
general signed criticizing
then FBI Director Comey
as the grounds for
his dismissal was all about
how he handled the Hillary
Clinton, or largely about how
he handled the Hillary
Clinton e-mail investigation.
Later on, the president said he
fired him mainly over Russia,
the Russia investigation.
And the attorney general
is basically saying, I
recused myself from the
Russia investigation,
but that's not a problem here.
WALTER DELLINGER: Well, the
attorney general makes the
point that he's responsible for
the entire department, and he
has to make personnel decisions.
Now, this one got awfully
close to his recusal issue.
And maybe he should
have stepped aside.
But, to me, the most interesting
question that wasn't fully
answered was, were you aware
- - when you sent the letter
to the president recommending
that Comey be fired, were you
aware that the president had
already decided to fire him?
And that question, he
-- the answer got evaded
in the back-and-forth.
And that will be an
interesting question for
someone to follow up with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is
your take on this exchange?
CARRIE CORDERO: Well, the
nut of it is, is, was former
Director Comey fired because of
the Russia investigation?
The president has said in an
interview that it was, that
Russia is what was on his mind.
And Attorney General Sessions
is clinging to this argument
that his -- his justification,
which is that it was
because of the handling of
the Hillary Clinton case.
And because he didn't answer
the one question, which was, in
the context of discussing with
the president the firing
of the FBI director,
did you also discuss the
Russia investigation,
that was the question that
really needed to be answered
to tie these pieces together.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we don't
have the answer to the question?
GEORGE TERWILLIGER: I don't
think he's clinging to anything.
It's very possible -- I don't
know the answer, but it's very
possible that there could be
two very different reasons
on the part of the president
and the attorney general and
the deputy attorney general
for dismissing Mr. Comey.
Indeed, I know you may have
to be sort of part of the
Justice family or cognoscenti
to appreciate this, but what
Jim Comey did last July in terms
of usurping, as the attorney
general put it, the authority
of the Justice Department to
make a prosecution decision,
and then the utter trashing
of Hillary Clinton that he did
along with that, that is so far
outside the mainstream, that
the attorney general said today
that he and Mr. Rosenstein
had been talking about
that for some time and the
need to replace Mr. Comey.
The fact that that may have
been, or not, I don't know,
convenient to the president
for other reasons is something,
you know, that I'm sure the
Senate will want to explore,
but it doesn't impugn
the attorney general's
integrity at all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But just to
quickly follow up, if the Russia
investigation was any part
of the reason for the
president's firing the
FBI director, and the
attorney general was
- - attached himself to that
decision, that wasn't a problem?
That didn't violate his recusal?
GEORGE TERWILLIGER: Well, it
might have if, in fact, you
know, he thought that was the
reason or he acted as
that -- the reason.
But I think Walter a few minutes
ago made a very good point.
The recusal is as to one case
out of thousands in the Justice
Department, albeit an important
one.
The attorney general
still has a responsibility
to run the department,
not the least of which
is to make sure he has the
right people in the top jobs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just very
quickly, Walter Dellinger,
what is the -- what
the -- do you think we
can get to the bottom of this
question of whether the recusal
was violated in some way?
WALTER DELLINGER: I think
we will, because I think
the special counsel,
follow-up hearings
are going to say, look, either
the president formally invoke
executive privilege or answer
the question about whether you
knew already that the president
made up his mind to fire
Comey, and to deal with the
fact that it is extremely
unusual for a president to have
half-a-dozen conversations
with an FBI director directly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Walter Dellinger,
Carrie Cordero, George
Terwilliger, we thank you all.
Remarkable day,
another remarkable day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And for more
on the attorney general's
testimony, I'm now joined by the
top Democrat on the House
Intelligence Committee.
He is Representative Adam
Schiff of California.
Congressman Schiff,
thank you for joining us.
I know you paid close
attention to what was said
today by the attorney general.
Did you come away with a better
understanding of what has
happened over the last year?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF (D),
California: I did.
And what was notable to me was
the degree to which the attorney
general really corroborated
what is, I think, the most
significant of the meetings
that James Comey testified.
And that is, he did corroborate
that there was a meeting of
many people in the Oval Office.
And although he didn't say
it was at the president's
instruction, it was
pretty clear that it was.
Everyone left the room,
except for James Comey
and the president.
And the attorney general
acknowledged that he did linger,
that he was one of the last,
if not the last, to leave the
room, and also corroborated
the fact that, the following
day, Director Comey told him he
was essentially uncomfortable
with something that took place
in that meeting.
That tells me that James Comey's
testimony about that meeting
is far more accurate than
the president's statements about
that meeting, because, if there
wasn't something uncomfortable
about it, then why did the
director go the next day to
the attorney general and say,
don't leave me alone
again with the president?
The other point I would
make, Judy, is the one that
you have been discussing.
And that is, we cannot
accept this non-invocation
of privilege as a reason
to prohibit the Congress
from finding out whether the
attorney general wrote a memo
or wrote a letter along with
the deputy attorney general to
provide cover or pretext for
a decision they knew was made
on other grounds.
Now, I don't know if that's
the case, because he wouldn't
answer, but as it goes to the
very heart of whether
the president sought to
interfere or obstruct
the Russia investigation,
we need to use whatever
compulsory process is
necessary to get those answers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we heard
at the end of the meeting --
of the hearing, rather, the
chairman, Richard Burr, Senator
Burr, asked the attorney
general to go back to the White
House to see if there's more
of his communications with the
president and with anyone in the
White House that they can share.
Is that something that
you think is likely to
produce some answers?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Well, I don't know.
I would certainly hope so.
I will say this, in light of
the conversation that you just
had with Walter Dellinger and
Mr. Terwilliger,
a couple things.
First is, the questions
that were asked of the
attorney general were
all easily anticipated,
so there were no
surprise questions here.
There was no reason why
the White House could
not have instructed the
attorney general whether
they were going to
invoke privilege or not.
So I don't buy the idea that
the attorney general couldn't
know in advance whether he
needed to invoke the privilege.
They didn't want him to.
They didn't want
the optic of it.
And that's not a good
reason for refusing to
answer the questions.
But, more than that, if the
attorney general allowed himself
to be used as a pretext to
give justification for a firing
that was made on other grounds,
that not only violates his
recusal.
It also potentially violates
the law or is a highly unethical
practice, and we need to
find out whether
that's the case.
We don't know, but we have an
obligation in our investigation,
Bob Mueller will in his,
to get the answer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, how
do you get beyond his
refusal to answer, though?
If he's saying these were
privileged communications
that I had that stand
on precedent at the
Department of Justice, whether
they're written down or not,
how do you get through that?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Well, I think
the process, if we're going to
live up with our institutional
responsibility in Congress,
is to go back to the White
House and say, we want answers
to these questions.
Are you invoking the privilege?
And, if they're not, we need
to bring the attorney general
back before either our committee
in the House or before the
Senate committee and demand
answers to those questions.
If they do invoke privilege,
then we may need to litigate
the contours of that privilege.
The privilege cannot
be used as a shield to
protect or hide potential
impropriety or illegality.
So, we may have to go to court
to pierce that privilege, but
we do need to get to the bottom
of this.
We have the powers and
institution to do it,
and I think we have
an ethical obligation
and a responsibility to
the country to do it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman,
were you struck by,
were you surprised when
the attorney general
said that he had not had, had
not sought any sort of briefing
on attempts by the Russians
to interfere in the
election last year?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: I was struck by it.
Certainly, during his time in
the Senate and as a member of
the Armed Services Committee,
when we have a hostile
power, Russia, interfering
in our internal affairs,
you would think he
would have an interest in that.
But, more than that, it
was an echo of Director
Comey's testimony also
that the president
showed no curiosity,
no interest, no concern
over the Russia hack.
The only element of it that
concerned him was how it
might impact him personally.
That says, I think, a lot
about where the president is
coming from, but it was quite
jarring given this was an
attack on our democracy
by a foreign power.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman,
another thing I saw late this
afternoon after the hearing
concluded that the --
that Senator Dick Durbin,
who, of course, is in
the leadership among
Democrats in the Senate, was
saying that the attorney general
should step down based on
his testimony today, his --
and his performance in office.
Are you -- would
you go that far?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Well, I would want
to pursue two things before
I would be prepared to go
that far.
And the first is to do whatever
investigation we need to do to
find out whether his testimony
today about what happened
or didn't happen at the
Mayflower is accurate
and can be corroborated,
or wasn't accurate, in which
case, we do need to consider
the remedies that Dick Durbin
talked about.
But, also, we need to get
answers to the questions
about what went into
the firing of Director
Comey.
And if he refuses and doesn't
have a legal basis to do so,
then, again, I think we may
end up where Senator Durbin is.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At this point,
just quickly, Congressman, are
you optimistic that Congress,
that your committee, the Senate
committee, are eventually
going to get to the bottom
of this?
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Well, you
know, I certainly hope so.
I think we have the look at
this in a very nonpartisan way
and try to, as best we can,
divorce ourselves
of the consequences.
But what is at stake here is
really our system of checks and
balances and whether we're going
to allow an administration not
to invoke privilege, but just to
say it's inconvenient for us to
tell you the answers.
It wouldn't reflect well on us,
so we're going to invoke some
inchoate privilege that doesn't
exist.
We can't tolerate that.
We can't stand for that.
And at the end of the day, I
don't think Bob Mueller will,
and Congress shouldn't either.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressman
Adam Schiff of California, the
ranking Democrat on the House
Intelligence Committee,
thank you very much.
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the
day's other news: Leaders
of two Senate committees
have reached agreement
on new sanctions against Russia.
The plan, announced last night,
targets corruption, human rights
abuses and weapons shipments
to Syria.
It also requires congressional
review if a president tries to
ease or end existing sanctions.
Pentagon leaders were
criticized over not
finishing a new strategy
for the war in Afghanistan.
At a Senate hearing, Defense
Secretary James Mattis says he
will provide details next month.
Arizona Republican John McCain,
chair of the Armed Services
Committee, said it should have
been done within the
administration's first 60 days.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN (R), Arizona: Unless
we get a strategy from you,
you're going to get a strategy
from us.
The fact is, it's not our job.
It's not our job.
It's yours.
JAMES MATTIS, U.S.
Secretary of Defense: Sir,
I understand the urgency.
I understand it's
my responsibility.
We are not winning in
Afghanistan right now.
And we will correct this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Secretary
Mattis had his own
complaint about Congress.
He said that -- quote -- "No
enemy has hurt combat readiness
more than the automatic spending
cuts of recent years."
Verizon completed its takeover
of Yahoo! today in a deal
valued at $4.5 billion.
Yahoo!'s news and other
offerings will be folded into a
new Verizon subsidiary called
Oath.
And on Wall Street today,
the Dow Jones industrial
average gained 92 points
to close at 21328.
The Nasdaq rose nearly
45 points, and the
S&P 500 added 11.
And the Golden State Warriors
are celebrating their second
NBA championship in three years.
They captured the title
last night in Oakland,
California, after
finishing off the Cleveland
Cavaliers in five games.
Golden State lost to Cleveland
in last year's finals.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
an American student released
from North Korea, but his
parents say he is in a
coma; Uber in turmoil
- - the company's CEO
takes a leave of absence;
behind the jobs numbers that
President Trump says are signs
of a growing economy; and much
more.
Now to the release
of Otto Warmbier from
captivity in North Korea.
The American college student
was arrested almost 18 months
ago during a trip to the
reclusive nation, and he was
sentenced to 15 years in prison.
This morning came word suddenly
that the United States had
secured his release, but under
apparently desperate
circumstances.
Warmbier is comatose,
and has been for a year.
An American delegation in
Pyongyang petitioned for his
immediate release yesterday.
Our chief foreign
affairs correspondent,
Margaret Warner, reports.
REX TILLERSON, U.S. Secretary
of State: At the president's
direction, the Department
of State has secured
the release of Otto
Warmbier from North Korea.
MARGARET WARNER: The
announcement came from
Secretary of State Rex
Tillerson at a Senate
budget hearing.
The 22-year-old University of
Virginia student was finally
free, after being jailed by the
North's repressive
regime for 17 months.
Anna Fifield has been
reporting the story for
The Washington Post.
She spoke via Skype from Tokyo.
ANNA FIFIELD, The Washington
Post: What I have been told
is that, last Monday, June
the 5th, the North Koreans
actually approached Americans
who they talk to, and they said
that Otto Warmbier was in
a coma and had been in a
coma for more than a year.
And that started the
ball rolling to have
him medically evacuated.
The North Koreans said
that he came down with
a case of botulism soon
after his sentencing,
and that he was given a sleeping
pill and fell into a coma,
and he didn't wake up from
that.
MARGARET WARNER: Warmbier's
parents confirmed their
son is in a coma, and
had been medically
evacuated.
In a statement to the Associated
Press, they also said: "We
want the world to know how
we and our son have been
brutalized and terrorized
by the pariah regime."
Warmbier was arrested
after he allegedly took
a propaganda poster from
the wall of a Pyongyang
hotel on New Year's Eve, 2015.
He'd been in North Korea
as part of a tour group.
In March last year,
he was sentenced to
15 years hard labor.
OTTO WARMBIER, Released North
Korean Prison: I have made
the worst mistake of my life.
MARGARET WARNER: In the past,
Pyongyang has used detained
American citizens to try to
exert leverage over the U.S.
But Anna Fifield says, this
time, the North had appeared
unwilling to bargain.
It didn't respond to U.S. offers
to send a high-level envoy
to discuss Warmbier and three
other Americans
held by the North.
One was arrested
just last month.
Pyongyang's attitude
changed in May.
It agreed to let Swedish
diplomats visit the prisoners,
and with news of Warmbier's dire
condition, Pyongyang urgently
requested a meeting with a
top U.S. official at the U.N.
last week.
At that point, Fifield said,
President Trump got involved.
ANNA FIFIELD: Once Otto
Warmbier's condition was known,
I'm told that the president did
become involved, that he was
informed, that he personally
gave the order to do everything
that they could to
get Otto Warmbier out.
MARGARET WARNER: The release
comes at a time of heightened
tensions between Washington
and the regime of Kim Jong-un.
Pyongyang has ramped up its
nuclear and missile programs.
In response, the U.S. has taken
a tough tack, and recently
began deploying the advanced
anti-missile defense known
as THAAD to South Korea.
But Fifield says another
motivation may have
driven the North Koreans.
ANNA FIFIELD: I think the North
Koreans have probably realized
that they did need to get
rid of Otto Warmbier
at some stage, that he
wasn't recovering, and
they needed to hand
him back.
MARGARET WARNER: The release
also coincides with former NBA
player Dennis Rodman's latest
visit to Pyongyang.
Fifield says she was told
Rodman's visit had nothing to
with the freeing of Warmbier.
Warmbier was flown first
to an American military
medical facility in
Japan, then flown on to
Cincinnati, near
his family's home.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: After months of
complaints about the company's
culture, allegations of
sexual harassment and
bias, Uber announced
changes at the top today.
Even though the ride service
giant is worth tens of billions
of dollars, it's in the midst
of major turmoil.
Now it will take new steps
to change the culture,
it say, and values of
a company that's become
criticized for very
aggressive, unethical and
potentially illegal tactics.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Perhaps the
biggest immediate change, Uber's
chief executive and co-founder,
Travis Kalanick, will take an
indefinite leave of absence.
That comes after a personal
loss, the death of his mother,
but also coincides with a new
report on company policy
and behavior led by former
Attorney General Eric Holder.
Uber's board of directors
reportedly adopted a
series of recommendations
from Holder, including
more oversight of
leadership, new measures
to increase diversity
and inclusion, stricter
guidelines for employee
behavior, and a pledge to change
Uber's core founding values.
Uber's problems grew after a
former engineer wrote a blog
post this past winter detailing
how she had been sexually
harassed at the company
and how her managers
ignored her complaints.
We're joined now
by Jessi Hempel.
She head of editorial for
Backchannel, a tech and
business publishing site.
Welcome to you.
So, is this, first of all,
a surprise that Travis
Kalanick is taking a leave?
And what further questions
does it raise for you?
JESSI HEMPEL, Backchannel: I
would say, in fact, it can't
be a surprise at this point
that Travis is taking a leave.
Look, he's having a
hard personal time.
He buried his mother on Friday.
But, beyond that,
the company needs it.
Shareholders are worried.
They're worried that
the company is going to
begin the lose value.
And as to what questions that
it raises for me, I think the
biggest question is, Travis
is a guy who has managed,
through very smart manipulation
of the shares of the company,
to maintain a ton of
control of this company.
He certainly will
stay on the board.
I want to know what it really
means that he's taking a leave.
Is he actually going to be
able to step back and let
somebody else run the company?
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, so, what
are the core - - what is the
core problem at Uber that comes
through the reporting up to
this point and what we know
from the Holder report that's
just come out?
JESSI HEMPEL: I would point to
two problems that are really
highlighted by the Holder
report.
The first and the most
egregious is a cultural problem.
It starts at the top.
This is a company that has for
too long taken it for granted
that people are disposable,
and that the CEO's machismo
attitude has just trickled down.
But, secondarily, this
is a 14,000-per company,
and Travis has been
running it as if it were
an eight-person start-up.
So, it has none of the
structures that most
companies put in place
the catch some of this
stuff a lot earlier on.
And that's what you really
see in the Holder report.
The Holder reports asks for what
at many companies this size are
very basic things, like a better
H.R. structure that works, or a
head of diversity and inclusion
that actually does that job.
These are pretty basic things.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, there is
always a question, of course,
when you have a company that's
really built and
around the image of one
person, how much can you
separate that person from
the company and how much
the company can thrive
now going forward.
JESSI HEMPEL: I mean,
I think that really is
the question for Uber.
It's a paradox of sorts.
The reason why Uber has been
so successful so far is also
the reason why the culture
is in such crisis.
If you truly are able to strip
Travis, not just Travis, but
his values from this company,
what do you have left?
What are you going
to rebuild it as?
What is the vision
going forward?
JEFFREY BROWN: So, do you
see any new steps in what you
have seen so far to ensure the
diversity, the better kind of
leadership, the taking away
the bias that's been there?
JESSI HEMPEL: Well, absolutely.
I mean, this is a company that's
truly taking this seriously.
Now, it's about time.
But last week, we saw that
the company hired Frances Frei
from Harvard Business School.
She's a renowned executive
leadership expert.
And she's going to come in, and
she says she has full leeway
to do whatever she needs to
do to improve the culture.
But, you know, the
biggest challenge for
this company right now is
that it has no leadership.
I mean, it's not just that
it doesn't have Travis.
It's executive ranks are
incredibly thin right now.
And so Uber's first -- the
first thing it needs to do is
simply put new leaders in place.
And, frankly, it's a pretty
hard place to recruit
skilled leaders right now.
I don't know a heck of a lot
of people who want to go.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Excuse me.
JESSI HEMPEL: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: How much impact
has all this had on ridership
and on the bottom line?
JESSI HEMPEL: Well, it's
hard to say right now.
I mean, profits --
revenues continue to
agree at this company,
and its loss last quarter
shrunk some.
But we have also seen the
competitor Lyft gain some
market share in the U.S.
And I have heard that
advertisers are a little
nervous about putting
their brand next to
Uber right now.
And so I think that we're
going to start to see over the
long term, over the next few
months the impact that the
last few months has had.
JEFFREY BROWN: And just very
briefly, Jessi, how much of all
this is being watched by other
companies who have been
charged with a similar kind
of culture in Silicon Valley?
JESSI HEMPEL: You make
a really great point.
Uber is in the spotlight
for this, but this
isn't an Uber problem.
This is a problem that a lot of
start-ups have that have grown
to these massive valuations
with many employees based
on the charisma and the
vision of one founder.
And I think one thing that we
will see going forward is that
Silicon Valley will hopefully
look itself in the mirror and
rethink some of the ways that
it structures these start-ups
to begin with.
JEFFREY BROWN: Jessi Hempel
of Backchannel, thank you.
Thank you very much.
JESSI HEMPEL: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Much of the
president's agenda is aimed at
kicking the economy into higher
gear and creating more jobs.
Just four months into office,
the president has made numerous
claims about the jobs he's
created and the jobs he's saved.
He's in Wisconsin tonight,
and is spending a good part
of his week promoting some of
his
job-creating initiatives.
But what's the real record on
some of the president's claims?
William Brangham takes a
look behind the numbers.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Today,
the president repeated
a claim he's been making
for months: His policies
are creating new jobs that
far surpass his predecessors.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: I think probably
seldom has any president
and administration done more or
had more success so early on,
including a record number of
resolutions to eliminate
job-killing regulations.
And we see it all over the
country, where jobs are starting
that would never have started,
ever, under any circumstance.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Earlier this
month, the president claimed
he helped claim more than
one million new jobs.
DONALD TRUMP: More than a
million private sector jobs.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But that
number was based on an estimate
from a payroll company.
The U.S. Labor Department
reported far fewer jobs.
This weekend, the president
correctly tweeted out a
lower number, 600,000.
STEVEN RATTNER, Former Adviser
to President Obama: In my 40
years of being in and around
Washington and economic policy,
I have never seen a president
try to take credit for as
many things as he has
tried to take credit
for on the job front.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Steve Rattner
is an analyst and Wall Street
financier who also headed
President Obama's Auto
Industry Task Force.
According to the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, in the four
months before President Trump's
election, the U.S. economy
added about 840,000 jobs.
In the four months since
his inauguration, it's
added about 600,000.
STEVEN RATTNER: The U.S. economy
is like a huge battleship.
It doesn't turn fast.
And so I think to judge any
president by a few months of
results, whether they're good
or bad, is way premature.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Veronique de
Rugy, a libertarian economist
at George Mason University, says
giving credit to a president
for job numbers, good
or bad, is misleading.
VERONIQUE DE RUGY, George
Mason University: It's wrong
to be thinking about the power
of the president
in terms of jobs.
What is important to think is
how -- what kind of policies
can be put in place to grow
the economy, and that,
in theory, creates jobs.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Since
he was elected, the
president claims he's
persuaded numerous companies
to keep and grow jobs here
in the U.S., but analysts who
have looked at these numbers
say they're not nearly as
clear-cut as the president says.
Take the president's claim back
in December that the heating
and cooling companies United
Technologies and Carrier would
be keeping jobs in the U.S.
and not sending them to Mexico.
DONALD TRUMP: I will tell you
that United Technologies and
Carrier stepped it up, and
now they're keeping -- actually,
the number is over 1,100
people, which is so great, which
is so good.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: CEO Greg
Hayes told CNBC that a personal
phone call from the president
and his business-friendly
platform were important factors.
GREGORY HAYES, CEO, United
Technologies: And he simply
said, "Look, Greg, I need you to
re-look at the decision
to close the Indianapolis
factory of Carrier."
He said, "We're going to do a
lot of things in this country
that is going to make it a
lot more conducive
to manufacturing."
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It turned
out, though, only 800 jobs were
staying in the U.S., while 1,300
were in fact
leaving the country.
And those jobs that were staying
came after the company received
$7 million in tax incentives
from the state of Indiana.
Another example, just a few
weeks before the inauguration,
Ford Motor Company announced
they had scrapped plans
for a new billion-dollar
plant in Mexico.
The president hailed
the decision, but Ford's
then CEO, Mark Fields,
later said not moving
to Mexico was mostly
a business decision.
MARK FIELDS, Former CEO, Ford
Motor Company: Well, the main
reason for not building the
plant and canceling the
plant in Mexico is just
due to market demand.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For critics
of the president, like Steven
Rattner, these claims are P.R.
stunts to give the
appearance of action.
STEVEN RATTNER: My colleague
and I recently put together
a list for The New York Times
of every place he
had taken credit.
And, in fact, he doesn't
deserve credit for any of them.
The only jobs that he
can legitimately take
credit for saving were
those 800 jobs at Carrier
Corporation early in
the administration.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In one case,
the Trump administration's
claim about job creation
has blurred job categories.
SCOTT PRUITT, Environmental
Protection Agency Administrator:
Since the last -- fourth quarter
of last year until most
recently, added almost 50,000
jobs in the coal sector.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Last weekend,
EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt
made this striking claim, that
50,000 new coal jobs have been
created, which would mean the
entire U.S. coal industry had
doubled in just a few
Months.
fact-checkers quickly pointed
out that the vast majority
of those new jobs were not in
coal, but in mining.
In other interviews, Pruitt
included both categories
in the 50,000 number.
SCOTT PRUITT: You know, since
last -- the fourth quarter
of 2016, Chris, we have had
almost 50,000 jobs created in
the mining and - - and -- and
coal sector alone, in fact,
in the month of May,
almost 7,000 jobs.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Despite these
claims, many economists say
that, until the president's
major economic policies on
taxes, regulation and trade
are in place, they can't make a
proper verdict on
his job creation.
VERONIQUE DE RUGY: If you look
at the stock market, there
is just a lot of excitement
out there.
The question is whether they're
going to be able to translate
these into realities, which
then turns into real economic
growth that is based on
something else but hope.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The White
House is planning on hosting
another set of CEOs later this
week.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we're
going to continue to
follow the jobs story.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: In a social experiment, one
well-known poet writes short,
meaningless poems, and
tests the public reaction
by using Instagram.
Just how popular are they?
All that and more is on our
Web site at PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Wednesday: an exclusive
conversation with the
newly named United
States poet laureate.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.